README.md, before:

# chromosome-browser

**Goals**:
* A chromosome browser to easily find overlapping DNA segments between your matches
* Visualize segment data from multiple sources at the same time: gedmatch, familytreedna, myheritage, 23andme or your handcrafted csv file.


Features
* Copy/paste your CSV data (gedmatch, familytreedna, myheritage, 23andme)
* Drag and drop CSV files from your desktop
* No limits on the number of segments
* All the rendering is done on the client side. No data sent to servers.
* No tracking. No Google Analytics.
* Filter by centimorgan (cM)
* Include or exclude kits (persons)
* Different views (compact, by kit, ordered by segment)
* You can save the webpage to your desktop and use the Chromosome Browser without Internet connection.
* double click a segment to highlight all segments for that match.
* right click to highlight all segments which overlap with that DNA kit.
* right click to un-highlight all segments which overlap with that DNA kit.
* Choose to hide segments not highlighted.

Basically, you can now choose what kits you want to see easily, and interactively.
e.g. I have a distant cousin who shares my great grandfather.  Now I can choose to highlight segements whoich are common with them, and then choose to exclude segments which are common to my great grandfather's wife.


### CSV data formats

Formats supported are

familytreedna.com segments file format
```
NAME,MATCHNAME,CHROMOSOME,START LOCATION,END LOCATION,CENTIMORGANS,MATCHING SNPS
or
Name,Match Name,Chromosome,Start Location,End Location,Centimorgans,Matching SNPs
```

myheritage.com segments file format
```
Name,"Match name",Chromosome,"Start Location","End Location","Start RSID","End RSID",Centimorgans,SNPs
```

gedmatch.com segments file format
```
"kit1","name1","email1","kit2","name2","email2","chr","start","end","cm"
```

23andme segments file format
```
"Display Name","Surname","Chromosome Number","Chromosome Start Point","Chromosome End Point","Genetic Distance","# SNPs","Full IBD","Link to Compare View","Sex","Birth Year","Set Relationship","Predicted Relationship","Relative Range","Percent DNA Shared","# Segments Shared","Maternal Side","Paternal Side","Maternal Haplogroup","Paternal Haplogroup","Birthplace","Residence","Family Surnames","Family Locations","Maternal Grandmother Birth Country","Maternal Grandfather Birth Country","Paternal Grandmother Birth Country","Paternal Grandfather Birth Country","Self Reported Ashkenazi Jewish Descent","Notes","Sharing Status"
```

### Export segments file

To export your segment data (familytreedna.com)
* Sign in to familytreedna.com
* Open the Family Finder - Chromosome Browser
* Click on `Download All Matches to Excel (CSV Format)`

To export your segment data (myheritage.com)
* Sign in to myheritage.com
* Open the DNA - DNA matches
* Click on `Export shared DNA segment info for all DNA matches`

To export your segment data (gedmatch.com)
* Sign in to gedmatch.com
* Select `Analyse your data` and `'One-to-many' matches`
* Choose a kit and click on `Display Results`
* Select some kits by clicking the checkbox in the `Select` column
* Click the `Submit` button
* Click the `List/CSV` tab
* Click the `Segment CSV file` button

To export your segment data (23andme)
* Sign in to 23andme.com
* Click on `DNA relatives`
* Click on `Download aggregate data`

## TODO
* Sort by cM
* Make it pretty
* Fix performance problem with Compact view and cM<5
* Improve screen resize
* Improve mobile usability

## Screenshot

![Chromosome 1 Compact View](screenshot.png?raw=true "Chromosome 1 Compact View")

Commit message:

Add drop of myHeritage match list for access to Tree and Review match pages. Add read of actions section from myHeritage style CSV. Add analysis of startRSID and endRSID Add 'both' option to view overlap beteen two kits.

README.md, after:

# chromosome-browser

**Goals**:
* A chromosome browser to easily find overlapping DNA segments between your matches
* Visualize segment data from multiple sources at the same time: gedmatch, familytreedna, myheritage, 23andme or your handcrafted csv file.


Features
* Copy/paste your CSV data (gedmatch, familytreedna, myheritage, 23andme)
* Drag and drop CSV files from your desktop
* No limits on the number of segments
* All the rendering is done on the client side. No data sent to servers.
* No tracking. No Google Analytics.
* Filter by centimorgan (cM)
* Include or exclude kits (persons)
* Different views (compact, by kit, ordered by segment)
* You can save the webpage to your desktop and use the Chromosome Browser without Internet connection.
* double click a segment to highlight all segments for that match.
* right click to highlight all segments which overlap with that DNA kit.
* right click to un-highlight all segments which overlap with that DNA kit.
* Choose to hide segments not highlighted.
* drop a myHeritage matches list(s), allowing right-click to Review match or View tree.


Basically, you can now choose what kits you want to see easily, and interactively.
e.g. I have a distant cousin who shares my great grandfather.  Now I can choose to highlight segements whoich are common with them, and then choose to exclude segments which are common to my great grandfather's wife.

Also identifies segments which have a common start point or end point.  These segments may indicate a common ancestor *above* a known common ancestor if the segment start/end is within a segment from a known match.

These 'interesting matches' may be downloaded from a right click.

### CSV data formats

Formats supported are

familytreedna.com segments file format
```
NAME,MATCHNAME,CHROMOSOME,START LOCATION,END LOCATION,CENTIMORGANS,MATCHING SNPS
or
Name,Match Name,Chromosome,Start Location,End Location,Centimorgans,Matching SNPs
```

myheritage.com segments file format
```
Name,"Match name",Chromosome,"Start Location","End Location","Start RSID","End RSID",Centimorgans,SNPs
```

gedmatch.com segments file format
```
"kit1","name1","email1","kit2","name2","email2","chr","start","end","cm"
```

23andme segments file format
```
"Display Name","Surname","Chromosome Number","Chromosome Start Point","Chromosome End Point","Genetic Distance","# SNPs","Full IBD","Link to Compare View","Sex","Birth Year","Set Relationship","Predicted Relationship","Relative Range","Percent DNA Shared","# Segments Shared","Maternal Side","Paternal Side","Maternal Haplogroup","Paternal Haplogroup","Birthplace","Residence","Family Surnames","Family Locations","Maternal Grandmother Birth Country","Maternal Grandfather Birth Country","Paternal Grandmother Birth Country","Paternal Grandfather Birth Country","Self Reported Ashkenazi Jewish Descent","Notes","Sharing Status"
```


### Actions

when using a myHeritage file, yo can add to the top an actions section to highlight ot unhighlight certain kits and overlapping kits.

this works like the right-click highlight and unhighlight - just saves you finding all the kits you are interested in every time.

Add:
```
action,<kit ID>,<name for ref>,,,,,,,,highlight
action,<kit ID>,<name for ref>,,,,,,,,unhighlight
action,<kit ID>,<name for ref>,,,,,,,,ignore
```

This allows you to pre-highlight kits segments you are specifically interested in.


### Export segments file

To export your segment data (familytreedna.com)
* Sign in to familytreedna.com
* Open the Family Finder - Chromosome Browser
* Click on `Download All Matches to Excel (CSV Format)`

To export your segment data (myheritage.com)
* Sign in to myheritage.com
* Open the DNA - DNA matches
* Click on `Export shared DNA segment info for all DNA matches`

To export your segment data (gedmatch.com)
* Sign in to gedmatch.com
* Select `Analyse your data` and `'One-to-many' matches`
* Choose a kit and click on `Display Results`
* Select some kits by clicking the checkbox in the `Select` column
* Click the `Submit` button
* Click the `List/CSV` tab
* Click the `Segment CSV file` button

To export your segment data (23andme)
* Sign in to 23andme.com
* Click on `DNA relatives`
* Click on `Download aggregate data`

## TODO
* Sort by cM
* Make it pretty
* Fix performance problem with Compact view and cM<5
* Improve screen resize
* Improve mobile usability

## Screenshot

![Chromosome 1 Compact View](screenshot.png?raw=true "Chromosome 1 Compact View")
